repr(ordered_fields) (#3845)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/3845-repr-ordered-fields.md

Using `repr(C)` in editions <= 2024 triggers a lint to use `repr(ordered_fields)` as a future compatibility lint with a machine-applicable fix. If you are using `repr(C)` for FFI, then you may silence this lint. If you are using `repr(C)` for anything else, please switch over to `repr(ordered_fields)` so updating to future editions doesn't change the meaning of your code.

```
warning: use of `repr(C)` in type `Foo`
  --> src/main.rs:14:10
   |
14 |     #[repr(C)]
   |       ^^^^^^^ help: consider switching to `repr(ordered_fields)`
   |     struct Foo {
   |
   = note: `#[warn(edition_2024_repr_c)]` on by default
   = note: `repr(C)` is planned to change meaning in the next edition to match the target platform's layout algorithm. This may change the layout of this type on certain platforms. To keep the current layout, switch to `repr(ordered_fields)`
```

After enough time has passed, and the community has switched over:
This makes it easier to tell *why* the `repr` was applied to a given struct. If `repr(C)`, it's about FFI and interop. If `repr(ordered_fields)`, then it's for a dependable layout.

> # Reference-level explanation

Author: Does this look better @Lokathor?

Reviewer: Yes, much better!

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Currently `repr(C)` serves two roles
1. Provide a consistent, cross-platform, predictable layout for a given type
2. Match the target C compiler's struct/union layout algorithm and ABI

But in some cases, these two cases are in tension due to platform weirdness (even on major platforms like Windows MSVC)
* https://github.com/rust-lang/unsafe-code-guidelines/issues/521
* https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/81996

Providing any fix for case 2 would subtly break any users of case 1, which makes this difficult to fix within a single edition. 

As an example of this tension: on Windows MSVC, `repr(C)` doesn't always match what MSVC does for  ZST structs (see this [issue](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/81996) for more details)

```rust
// should have size 8, but has size 0
#[repr(C)]
struct SomeFFI([i64; 0]);
```

Of course, making `SomeFFI` size 8 doesn't work for anyone using `repr(C)` for case 1. They want it to be size 0 (as it currently is). 

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

> `repr(ordered_fields)` is a new representation that can be applied to `struct`, `enum`, and `union` to give them a consistent, cross-platform, and predictable in memory layout.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`repr(ordered_fields)` is a new representation that can be applied to `struct`, `enum`, and `union` to give them a consistent, cross-platform, and predictable in-memory layout.
```

"cross-platform" -- the layout will differ when there are different layouts for struct members' types, in particular primitive types can have different alignments which changes the amount of padding.

e.g., `#[repr(ordered_fields)] struct S(u8, f64);` doesn't have the same layout on x86_64 and i686

Author: Good point, this will need to be documented as a hazard in the `ordered_fields` docs. However, the `repr` itself will be cross-platform. For example, `#[repr(ordered_fields)] struct Cross([u8; 3], SomeEnum);` will be truly cross-platform (given that `SomeEnum` is!).

> 
> - edited version of the [reference](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/type-layout.html#the-c-representation) on `repr(C)`

The exact algorithm is deferred to whatever the default target C compiler does with default settings (or if applicable, the most commonly used settings). 
## `repr(ordered_fields)` 

> The `ordered_fields` representation is designed for one purpose: create types that you can soundly perform operations on that rely on data layout such as reinterpreting values as a different type
> 
> This representation can be applied to structs, unions, and enums.
> 
> - edited version of the [reference](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/type-layout.html#the-c-representation) on `repr(C)`
### struct
Structs are laid out in memory in declaration order, with padding bytes added as necessary to preserve alignment.
And their alignment would be the same as their most aligned field.

```rust
// size 16, align 4
#[repr(ordered_fields)]

> struct FooStruct {

Author: Nice catch, I'll mention that this will be on some standard 64-bit x86 machine. I think that sufficiently constrains this.

    a: u8,
    b: u32,
    c: u16,
    d: u32,
}
```

Would be laid out in memory like so

```
a...bbbbcc..dddd
```
### union
Unions would be laid out with the same size as their largest field, and the same alignment as their most aligned field. 

```rust
// size 4, align 4
#[repr(ordered_fields)]
union FooUnion {
    a: u8,
    b: u32,
    c: u16,
    d: u32,
}
```

Would have the same layout as `u32`.
### enum

> The enum discriminant will be the smallest signed integer type which can hold all of the discriminant values (unless otherwise specified). The discriminants are assigned such that each variant without an explicit discriminant is exactly one more than the previous variant in declaration order. 

Author: I don't think this matches how enum discriminants work for `repr(C)`, but I'm not sure what algorithm is used for `repr(C)`. If someone knows, please LMK, and I'll update this section accordingly.

Author: I think I will change this to just say that it will use the same algorithm as `repr(C)` (so that the two reprs actually do match), and add a lint to ensure that `repr(ordered_fields)` is used with `repr(uN)`/`repr(iN)` (the lint can suggest which integer to use).

> The enum discriminant will be the smallest signed integer type which can hold all of the discriminant values (unless otherwise specified). The discriminants are assigned such that each variant without an explicit discriminant is exactly one more than the previous variant in declaration order. 

Author: Ah, I forgot about this. Yes, will update to use tags instead of discriminant. (although for these reprs, there is no difference).

- Feature Name: `repr_ordered_fields`
- Start Date: 2025-08-05
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#3845](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3845)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Introduce a new `repr` (let's call it `repr(ordered_fields)`, but that can be bikeshedded if this RFC is accepted) that can be applied to `struct`, `enum`, and `union` types, which guarantees a simple and predictable layout. Then provide an initial migration plan to switch users from `repr(C)` to `repr(ordered_fields)`.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Currently `repr(C)` serves two roles
1. Provide a consistent, cross-platform, predictable layout for a given type

> 2. Match the target C compiler's struct/union layout algorithm and ABI

Author: I think this is also useful for unions, so we don't need to rely on `repr(C)` to ensure that all fields of a `union` are at offset 0.

> This could be contrasted with other potential reprs that I wouldn't expect this RFC to add...

This also works as an argument against names like `repr(consistent)`, since there are multiple consistent and useful `repr`, making it not descriptive enough.

> 2. Match the target C compiler's struct/union layout algorithm and ABI

Author: I don't mind spelling it as `repr(offset_zero)` for unions if that helps get this RFC accepted 😄. However, I have a sneaking suspicion that this isn't the contentious part of this RFC.
I know the name isn't optimal (intentionally). This can be hashed out after the RFC is accepted (or even give a different name for all of `struct`, `union`, and `enum`).
The most important bit for me is just that we do the split (for all of `struct`, `union`, and `enum`, to be consistent).

    * Before this RFC is accepted, t-compiler will need to commit to fixing the layout algorithm sometime in the next edition.
* The name of the new repr `repr(ordered_fields)` is a mouthful (intentionally for this RFC), maybe we could pick a better name? This could be done after the RFC is accepted.
    * `repr(linear)`
    * `repr(ordered)`
    * `repr(sequential)`
    * `repr(consistent)`
    * something else?
* Is the ABI of `repr(ordered_fields)` specified (making it safe for FFI)? Or not?
* Should unions expose some niches?
    * For example, if all variants of the union are structs which have a common prefix, then any niches of that common prefix could be exposed (i.e. in the enum case, making union of structs behave more like an enum).
    * This must be answered before stabilization, as it is set in stone after that
* Should this `repr` be versioned?
    * This way we can evolve the repr (for example, by adding new niches)
* Should we change the meaning of `repr(C)` in editions <= 2024 after we have reached edition 2033? Yes, it's a breaking change, but at that point it will likely only be breaking code no one uses.
    * Leaning towards no

> * Should we warn on `repr(ordered_fields)` when explicit tag type is specified (i.e. no `repr(u8)`/`repr(i32)`)

Reviewer 2: I think we should not warn when there's an explicit tag type, since there are common valid reasons to have an explicit tag type, you're trying to get a specific layout rather than defaulting to whatever tag type rustc feels like picking today. e.g. having a struct that matches some specific file format:
```rust
#[repr(u32)]
pub enum WavFmtSize {
    Sixteen = 0x10u16.to_le(),
}

#[repr(ordered_fields, u32)]
pub enum WavFileChunk {
    Fmt {
        fmt_size: WavFmtSize,
        ...
    } = u32::from_ne_bytes(b"fmt "),
    DataHeader {
        data_size: U32LE,
    } = u32::from_ne_bytes(b"data"),
}
```

Author: Oops, I meant if an explicit tag type is missing

* https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/81996

Providing any fix for case 2 would subtly break any users of case 1, which makes this difficult to fix within a single edition. 

As an example of this tension: on Windows MSVC, `repr(C)` doesn't always match what MSVC does for  ZST structs (see this [issue](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/81996) for more details)

```rust
// should have size 8, but has size 0
#[repr(C)]
struct SomeFFI([i64; 0]);
```

Of course, making `SomeFFI` size 8 doesn't work for anyone using `repr(C)` for case 1. They want it to be size 0 (as it currently is). 

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

`repr(ordered_fields)` is a new representation that can be applied to `struct`, `enum`, and `union` to give them a consistent, cross-platform, and predictable in-memory layout.

`repr(C)` in edition <= 2024 is an alias for `repr(ordered_fields)` and in all other editions, it matches the default C compiler for the given target for structs, unions, and field-less enums. Enums with fields will be laid out as if they are a union of structs with the corresponding fields.

> Using `repr(C)` in editions <= 2024 triggers a lint to use `repr(ordered_fields)` as a future compatibility lint with a machine-applicable fix. If you are using `repr(C)` for FFI, then you may silence this lint. If you are using `repr(C)` for anything else, please switch over to `repr(ordered_fields)` so updating to future editions doesn't change the meaning of your code.

Reviewer 3: I think this is too noisy. Most code out there using repr(C) is probably fine - IIUC, if you're not targeting Windows or AIX, maybe definitely fine? - and having a bunch of allow(...) across a bunch of projects seems unfortunate.

Maybe we can either (a) only enable the lint for migration, i.e., the next edition's cargo fix would add allows for you or (b) we find some new name... C2 for the existing repr(C) usage to avoid allows. But (b) also seems too noisy to me.

Reviewer 4: Maybe it could just be an optional edition compatibility lint, so if someone enables e.g. `rust_20xx_compatibility` it shows up but otherwise not.

Author: > (a) only enable the lint for migration

That was the intention, hence the name `edition_2024_repr_c`. I'll make this more clear, that this is intended to be a migration lint.

Rustfix would update to `#[repr(ordered_fields)]` to preserve the current behavior. For the FFI crates, `#![allow(edition_2024_repr_c)]` at the top of `lib.rs` would suffice. If you have a mix of FFI and non-FFI uses of `repr(C)`, then you'll have to do the work to figure out which is which, no matter what option is chosen to update `repr(C)` - even adding `repr(C2)`, since then the FFI use case would need to update all their reprs to `repr(C2)`.

Overall, I think this scheme only significantly burdens those who have a mix of FFI and non-FFI uses of `repr(C)`. But they were going to be burdened no matter what option was chosen.

Reviewer 5: I think the new wording is still too noisy. We shouldn't assume that *most* people using `repr(C)` are using it for ordering rather than FFI.

Author: That wasn't my intention, but I don't see another way to do all of the following in the next edition:

* make `repr(C)` mean - same layout/ABI as what the standard C compiler does
* make `repr(ordered_fields)` - the same algorithm that's listed for `repr(C)` in the Rust reference
* ensure that everyone who upgrades to the next edition gets the layout they need (as long as they read the warnings and follow the given advice)
* make it as painless as possible for people who don't mix FFI and stable ordering cases (which I suspect is the vast majority of people). In other words, each crate currently uses `repr(C)` either exclusively for FFI or exclusively for some stable layout.
* for people who do mix FFI and stable ordering cases in one crate, at least the warning should give them all the places they need to double-check, and they can silence the warning on a case-by-case basis.

I'm open to suggestions on how to handle the diagnostics. Within these constraints, I think my solution is the only real option we have. If there are some objections to these constraints, I would like to hear those too, maybe I missed the mark with these constraints, and missed a potential solution because of it.

1. Provide a consistent, cross-platform, predictable layout for a given type
2. Match the target C compiler's struct/union layout algorithm and ABI

But in some cases, these two cases are in tension due to platform weirdness (even on major platforms like Windows MSVC)
* https://github.com/rust-lang/unsafe-code-guidelines/issues/521
* https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/81996

Providing any fix for case 2 would subtly break any users of case 1, which makes this difficult to fix within a single edition. 

As an example of this tension: on Windows MSVC, `repr(C)` doesn't always match what MSVC does for  ZST structs (see this [issue](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/81996) for more details)

```rust
// should have size 8, but has size 0
#[repr(C)]
struct SomeFFI([i64; 0]);
```

Of course, making `SomeFFI` size 8 doesn't work for anyone using `repr(C)` for case 1. They want it to be size 0 (as it currently is). 

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

`repr(ordered_fields)` is a new representation that can be applied to `struct`, `enum`, and `union` to give them a consistent, cross-platform, and predictable in-memory layout.

> `repr(C)` in edition <= 2024 is an alias for `repr(ordered_fields)` and in all other editions, it matches the default C compiler for the given target for structs, unions, and field-less enums. Enums with fields will be laid out as if they are a union of structs with the corresponding fields.

Reviewer 6: This proposal does not address the x86-32 MSVC alignment issue (https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/112480).

Reviewer 6: The crux of the issue there is that on that platform, `u64` and `i64` are only guaranteed to be aligned to 4 bytes, but in C structs they are given padding as if aligned to 8. Currently, Rust incorrectly gives these types an `align_of` of 8 (matching an analogous bug in MSVC’s `alignof`). However, in correcting the `align_of`, we can’t change the layout of `repr(C)` structs accordingly on editions ≤2024, because that would break interop with C. So `repr(C)` on editions ≤2024 can’t be an alias for `ordered_fields` as proposed.

Author: Sure, I can update the RFC to add this

        // remove the tag so the caller only gets the fields they provided in order
        offsets.remove(0);
        
        variant_field_offsets.push(offsets);
        layout = layout_max(layout, variant_layout)?;
    }
    
    Ok((variant_field_offsets, layout))
}
```
### Migration to `repr(ordered_fields)`

The migration will be handled as follows:
* after `repr(ordered_fields)` is implemented
    * add an optional edition compatibility lint for `repr(C)`
    	* this warning should be advertised publicly (maybe on the Rust Blog?), so that as many people use it. Since even if you are staying on edition <= 2024, it is helpful to switch to `repr(ordered_fields)` to make your intentions clearer
    * at this point both `repr(ordered_fields)` and `repr(C)` will have identical behavior
    * the warning will come with a machine-applicable fix
        * Any crate that does not have FFI can just apply the autofix
        * Any crate which uses `repr(C)` for FFI can ignore the warning crate-wide
        * Any crate that mixes both must do extra work to figure out which is which. (This is likely a tiny minority of crates)

> * Once the next edition rolls around (2027?), `repr(C)` on the new edition will *not* warn. Instead, the meaning will have changed to mean *only* compatibility with C. The docs should be adjusted to mention this edition wrinkle.

Author: That's a good idea!

> * Once the next edition rolls around (2027?), `repr(C)` on the new edition will *not* warn. Instead, the meaning will have changed to mean *only* compatibility with C. The docs should be adjusted to mention this edition wrinkle.

Reviewer 2: if you're doing Rust-Rust FFI and expect any kind of ABI stability, you shouldn't be using `extern "Rust"` (since that's explicitly *not* stable), you should be using `extern "C"` (used by `abi_stable` afaict) or `extern "crabi"`, both of which would disable the lint according to my proposal.

> * Once the next edition rolls around (2027?), `repr(C)` on the new edition will *not* warn. Instead, the meaning will have changed to mean *only* compatibility with C. The docs should be adjusted to mention this edition wrinkle.

Reviewer 6: Two `repr(Rust)` structs with the same field names, types, and order are not guaranteed to have the same layout and ABI. But two `extern "Rust"` functions with the same signature, on the same platform and compiler version *are* guaranteed ABI-compatible. So there is a use-care for combining `repr(C)` with `extern "Rust"`.

> * Once the next edition rolls around (2027?), `repr(C)` on the new edition will *not* warn. Instead, the meaning will have changed to mean *only* compatibility with C. The docs should be adjusted to mention this edition wrinkle.

Author: I've added the new lint to all editions, and it should take precedence over the migration lint. This way, we can migrate as many people as possible to `repr(ordered_fields)`. Making it much easier to read code in the future, at the cost of some churn now.

2. Match the target C compiler's struct/union layout algorithm and ABI

But in some cases, these two cases are in tension due to platform weirdness (even on major platforms like Windows MSVC)
* https://github.com/rust-lang/unsafe-code-guidelines/issues/521
* https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/81996

Providing any fix for case 2 would subtly break any users of case 1, which makes this difficult to fix within a single edition. 

As an example of this tension: on Windows MSVC, `repr(C)` doesn't always match what MSVC does for  ZST structs (see this [issue](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/81996) for more details)

```rust
// should have size 8, but has size 0
#[repr(C)]
struct SomeFFI([i64; 0]);
```

Of course, making `SomeFFI` size 8 doesn't work for anyone using `repr(C)` for case 1. They want it to be size 0 (as it currently is). 

A tertiary motivation is to make progress on a workaround for the MSVC bug [rust-lang/rust/112480](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/112480). This proposal doesn't attempt a complete solution for the bug, but it will be a necessary component of any solution to the bug. 

> The issue here is that MSVC is inconsistent about the alignment of `u64`/`i64` (and possibly `f64`). In MSVC, the `alignof` macro reports an alignment of 4 bytes, but in structs, it is aligned to 8 bytes. And on these platforms, we report the alignment as 8 bytes. Any proper work around will require reducing the alignment of `u64`/`i64` to 4 bytes, and adjusting what `repr(C)` to treat `u64`/`i64`'s alignment as 8 bytes. This way, if you have references/pointers to `u64`/`i64` (for example, as out pointers), then the Rust side will not break when the C side passes a 4-byte aligned pointer (but not 8-byte aligned). This could happen if the C side put the integer on the stack, or was manually allocated at some 4-byte alignment.

Reviewer 6: This is not quite correct. MSVC’s `alignof` macro returns 8 for `u64`/`i64`, but when such values are placed on the stack, only an alignment of 4 is guaranteed. (MSVC’s `alignof` is therefore not compliant with the C standard.)

> 
> This representation can be applied to structs, unions, and enums. The exception is [zero-variant enums](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/items/enumerations.html#zero-variant-enums) for which the `C` representation is an error.
> 
> - edited version of the [reference](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/type-layout.html#the-c-representation) on `repr(C)`

The exact algorithm is deferred to whatever the default target C compiler does with default settings (or if applicable, the most commonly used settings). 
## `repr(ordered_fields)` 

> The `ordered_fields` representation is designed for one purpose: create types that you can soundly perform operations on that rely on data layout such as reinterpreting values as a different type
> 
> This representation can be applied to structs, unions, and enums.
> 
> - edited version of the [reference](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/type-layout.html#the-c-representation) on `repr(C)`
### struct
Structs are laid out in memory in declaration order, with padding bytes added as necessary to preserve alignment.

> And their alignment is the same as their most aligned field.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The alignment of a struct is the same as the alignment of the most aligned field.
```

```rust
// should have size 8, but has size 0
#[repr(C)]
struct SomeFFI([i64; 0]);
```

Of course, making `SomeFFI` size 8 doesn't work for anyone using `repr(C)` for case 1. They want it to be size 0 (as it currently is). 

The next two cases will not be solved by this RFC, but this RFC will provide the necessary steps towards the respective fixes.

This also plays a role in [#3718](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3718), where `repr(C, packed(N))` wants allow fields which are `align(M)` (while making the `repr(C, ...)` struct less packed). This is a footgun for normal uses of `repr(packed)`, so it would be better to relegate this strictly to the FFI use-case. However, since `repr(C)` plays two roles, this is difficult.

By splitting `repr(ordered_fields)`  off of `repr(C)`, we can allow `repr(C, packed(N))` to contain over-aligned fields (while making the struct less packed), and (continuing to) disallow `repr(ordered_fields, packed(N))` from containing aligned fields. Thus keeping the Rust-only case free of warts, without compromising on FFI use-cases.

> The final motivation is to make progress on a workaround for the MSVC bug [rust-lang/rust/112480](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/112480). 

Author: I think this is in the same boat as the MSVC issue, in that reducing the alignment of `f64` is a breaking change and would subtly break the layouts of existing types. So would need to be done with some care, and cannot be done with just this RFC.

(and MSVC issue was about `u64`/`i64` iirc)

> The final motivation is to make progress on a workaround for the MSVC bug [rust-lang/rust/112480](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/112480). 

Author: I don't see a reason not to include it, so I did. Can you check that I didn't miss something?

> The AIX C compiler only over-aligns double in structs when it is the first field. So fixing the problem might fix as much code as it breaks

Sure, but it's still a breaking change. (even if lower impact since it's a tier 3 target)
So a complete fix isn't possible with just this RFC (like with MSVC). It will require some plan on how to manage the breakage, since alignment changes affect all editions.

> The final motivation is to make progress on a workaround for the MSVC bug [rust-lang/rust/112480](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/112480). 

Reviewer 6: Seems good to me (but I am not an expert on this target).

> The final motivation is to make progress on a workaround for the MSVC bug [rust-lang/rust/112480](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/112480). 

Reviewer 8: > I think this is in the same boat as the MSVC issue, in that reducing the alignment of f64 is a breaking change and would subtly break the layouts of existing types

The MSVC change would *not* change repr(C) struct layout... but yeah it would change repr(ordered_fields) so this should probably be considered before stabilizing that.

> The final motivation is to make progress on a workaround for the MSVC bug [rust-lang/rust/112480](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/112480). 

Author: Yes, in future editions it would not break `repr(C)` layouts. But in current and past editions (where `repr(C)` is not changing in this RFC), it may break existing code.

* manually calculating the offsets of fields
	* This is common in code written before the stabilization of `offset_of` (currently only stabilized for `struct`)/`&raw const`/`&raw mut`
	* But sometimes this is still required if you are manually doing type-erasure and handling DSTs (for example, implementing [`erasable::Erasable`](https://docs.rs/erasable/1.3.0/erasable/trait.Erasable.html))
* manually calculating the layout for a DST, to prepare an allocation (see [slice-dst](https://crates.io/crates/slice-dst), specifically [here](https://github.com/CAD97/pointer-utils/blob/0fe399f8f7e519959224069360f3900189086683/crates/slice-dst/src/lib.rs#L162-L163))
* match layouts of two different types (or even, two different monomorphizations of the same generic type)
	* see [here](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/68099), where in `alloc` this is done for `Rc` and `Arc` to give a consistent layout for all `T`

So, providing any fix for case 2 would subtly break any users of case 1. This breakage cannot be checked easily since it relies on unsafe code making assumptions about data layouts, which makes this difficult to fix within a single edition.

> As an example of this tension: on Windows MSVC, `repr(C)` doesn't always match what MSVC does for  ZST structs (see this [issue](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/81996) for more details)

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
As an example of this tension: on Windows MSVC, `repr(C)` doesn't always match what MSVC does for ZST structs (see this [issue](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/81996) for more details)
```

```rust
// should have size 8, but has size 0
#[repr(C)]
struct SomeFFI([i64; 0]);
```

> Of course, making `SomeFFI` size 8 doesn't work for anyone using `repr(C)` for case 1. They want it to be size 0 (as it currently is). 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Of course, making `SomeFFI` size 8 doesn't work for anyone using `repr(C)` for case 1. They want it to be size 0 (as it currently is). 

Fixing the layout of this struct will also most likely let us remove a long-standing hack from our implementation of the MSVC ABI:
unlike all other ABIs, we do *not* entirely skip ZST with that ABI but instead mark them to be passed by-ptr.
This is needed to correctly pass types like `SomeFFI`.
If we fix our layout computation to match that of MSVC, we no longer need this special case in the ABI logic.
```

Reviewer 6: That issue should presumably be addressed in this RFC, no? `repr(C)` 1-ZSTs need to be passed by pointer, but does that apply to `repr(ordered_fields)` as well?

Reviewer 8: The main problem is that we have already specified that all 1-ZST have the same ABI. We need to figure out how to clean that up but I don't think this RFC needs to do that.

Reviewer 6: This RFC currently specifies that new `repr(C)` matches C. That requires breaking the “all 1-ZST have the same ABI” rule. So the RFC either needs to specify that it’s actually “`repr(C)` matches C except for 1-ZSTs”, or it needs to specify that we are breaking the rule. Can’t have it both ways

Reviewer 8: @RustyYato see the issue description of https://github.com/rust-lang/unsafe-code-guidelines/issues/552.

@Jules-Bertholet this RFC doesn't take a clear stance on "types that are not standard C but are allowed by some C compilers for that target", does it?

Reviewer 6: >  Though ABI is a cross-edition concern so it'd only help marginally to do this on new editions only.

I assume it would be based on the edition where the `repr(C)` 1-ZST is defined? I.e., same as everything else in this RFC. Note that, if you have:

```rust
// on new edition with new `repr(C)`
#[repr(C)]
struct NoFields {}

#[repr(transparent)]
struct Foo(u32, NoFields);
```

`NoFields` won’t be a ZST *at all* on `windows-msvc`, so it’s not really much more breaking to say `Foo` doesn’t work on `windows-gnu` either.

Reviewer 6: > Bumping the edition of the crate that has the empty C struct could lead to downstream build failures.

Well, yes, the whole point of this RFC is that changing the meaning of `repr(C)` is a breaking change that must be done over an edition.

The next two cases will not be solved by this RFC, but this RFC will provide the necessary steps towards the respective fixes.

This also plays a role in [#3718](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3718), where `repr(C, packed(N))` wants allow fields which are `align(M)` (while making the `repr(C, ...)` struct less packed). This is a footgun for normal uses of `repr(packed)`, so it would be better to relegate this strictly to the FFI use-case. However, since `repr(C)` plays two roles, this is difficult.

> By splitting `repr(ordered_fields)`  off of `repr(C)`, we can allow `repr(C, packed(N))` to contain over-aligned fields (while making the struct less packed), and (continuing to) disallow `repr(ordered_fields, packed(N))` from containing aligned fields. Thus keeping the Rust-only case free of warts, without compromising on FFI use-cases.

Reviewer 8: Yeah I think there's a pretty obvious semantics for `repr(ordered_fields, packed(N))` with `repr(aligned)` fields -- treat those fields like all other fields, i.e., cap their alignment to N. Not sure if that's worth punting to a future possibility.

   |     struct Foo {
   |
   = note: `#[warn(suspicious_repr_c)]` on by default
   = note: `repr(C)` is intended for FFI, and since there are no `extern` blocks or functions, it's likely that you meant to use `repr(ordered_fields)` to get a stable and consistent layout for your type
```

After enough time has passed, and the community has switched over:
This makes it easier to tell *why* the `repr` was applied to a given struct. If `repr(C)`, it's about FFI and interop. If `repr(ordered_fields)`, then it's for a dependable layout.
# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## `repr(C)`

> The `C` representation is designed for one purpose: creating types that are interoperable with the C Language.
> 
> This representation can be applied to structs, unions, and enums. The exception is [zero-variant enums](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/items/enumerations.html#zero-variant-enums) for which the `C` representation is an error.
> 
> - edited version of the [reference](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/type-layout.html#the-c-representation) on `repr(C)`

> The exact algorithm is deferred to whatever the default target C compiler does with default settings (or if applicable, the most commonly used settings). 

Reviewer 6: I think we should specify that `repr(Rust)` or `repr(ordered_fields)` 1-ZSTs (incl. tuples) are always removed, but otherwise if there is no direct C equivalent (e.g. `repr(Rust)` or `repr(ordered_fields)` fields, or fieldless struct if not supported by the C compiler), the layout should be consistent within the same compiler version but otherwise unspecified.

Any proper work around will require reducing the alignment of `u64`/`i64` to 4 bytes, and adjusting what `repr(C)` to treat `u64`/`i64`'s alignment as 8 bytes. This way, if you have references/pointers to `u64`/`i64` (for example, as out pointers), then the Rust side will not break when the C side passes a 4-byte aligned pointer (but not 8-byte aligned). This could happen if the C side put the integer on the stack, or was manually allocated at some 4-byte alignment.

For AIX, the issue is that `f64` is treated as aligned to 4-bytes if it is not the first field in a struct. i.e.
```C
struct Foo {
	char a;
	double b;
}
```
Field `b` would be laid out at offset 4, which is under-aligned (since `f64` has alignment 8 in Rust). Again, any proper workaround will require reducing the alignment of `f64`, and adjusting `repr(C)`.

## AIX layout bug

For more details, see this discussion on [irlo](https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/repr-c-aix-struct-alignment/21594/3).

> In AIX, the following struct `Floats` has the following field offsets: `[0, 64, 96]` (in bits)

Reviewer 8: That on its own wouldn't be so bad, it just indicates that `double` has a required alignment of 4 bytes.

The problem is that the struct overall has a size of 32 bytes -- it gets padded to a multiple of 8, since the first data member `a` is considered to have an alignment of 8.

Author: I've reworded the AIX section, so hopefully everything is correct now 🤞

> In AIX, the following struct `Floats` has the following field offsets: `[0, 64, 96]` (in bits)

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
In AIX, the following struct `Floats` has the following field offsets: `[0, 8, 12]` (in bytes)
```
I don't think using bits here is very intuitive...

```C
struct Floats {
    double a;
    char b;
    double c;
};
```

This is because
> In aggregates, the first member of this data type is aligned according to its natural alignment value; subsequent members of the aggregate are aligned on 4-byte boundaries.
> - [IBM Documentation](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/xl-c-and-cpp-aix/16.1?topic=data-using-alignment-modes) (Table 1, Note 1)

> Even though on AIX `alignof(double)` is 8, it is still laid out an a 4-byte boundary. 

Reviewer 6: I’m not actually sure whether this is true. `__alignof__(double)` is 8 on IBM’s compiler, but `__alignof__` is an IBM compiler extension. I don’t know what the C-standard `alignof(double)` is on Clang for this target.

Author: Nice catch, yes I meant `__alignof__`

    * at this point both `repr(ordered_fields)` and `repr(C)` will have identical behavior
    * the warning will come with a machine-applicable fix
        * Any crate that does not have FFI can just apply the autofix
        * Any crate which uses `repr(C)` for FFI can ignore the warning crate-wide
        * Any crate that mixes both must do extra work to figure out which is which. (This is likely a tiny minority of crates)
* Once the next edition rolls around (2027?), `repr(C)` on the new edition will *not* warn. Instead, the meaning will have changed to mean *only* compatibility with C. The docs should be adjusted to mention this edition wrinkle.
    * The warning for previous editions will continue to be in effect

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

* This will cause a large amount of churn in the Rust ecosystem
	* This is only necessary for those who are updating to the new edition. Which is as little churn as we can make it
* If we don't end up switching `repr(C)` to mean the system layout/ABI, then we will have two identical reprs, which may cause confusion.

> # Rationale and alternatives

Reviewer 9: The issues that this fixes are with ZSTs over FFI (basically never done), an AIX bug (tier 3 target), and might help with an x86_32 MSVC bug. That seems... Kinda weak IMO, compared to like a million `#[repr(C)]`s out there that currently work.

Maybe instead of planning to change `#[repr(C)]`, an alternative could be to introduce both `#[repr(ordered_fields)]` and `#[repr(bikeshed_broken_but_actual_C_struct_repr)]`, and have `#[repr(C)]` guaranteed to be an alias of `#[repr(ordered_fields)]`? And then we deprecate `#[repr(C)]` once those two are in everyone's MSRV and such.

This would avoid the hard issues of "when do we break this" and "oops, things act differently in edition 2027". Having previously fine `unsafe` code become unsound over an edition is dangerous territory.

---

Building on top of that, another alternative would be to not deprecate at all, and instead leave `#[repr(C)]` as an alias of `#[repr(ordered_fields)]`. (`#[repr(C)]` _is_ what the C standard says, it's just certain compilers that don't really follow the standard).

And then we instead introduce more specific checks like "type is `#[repr(C)]` + type is ZST or has 8-byte fields + type is used in FFI" -> "warn and suggest `#[repr(bikeshed_broken_but_actual_C_struct_repr)]`".

This would allow `#[repr(C)] struct Point { x: c_int, y: c_int }` and such to continue working just fine.

Reviewer 9: > There's also the problem of aligned structs inside packed structs.

Sorry, didn't fully grok that issue, so I assigned it a lower priority in my head. I'm not certain here, but I don't think that's incompatible with the alternatives I proposed?

> I don't think this is correct. The C standard says nothing about struct layout. Rust just made incorrect assumptions. We should fix that mistake instead of doubling down on it.

Perhaps. In any case, I'm not convinced that there isn't a bunch of C code that is broken by this as well because they make the same assumption Rust does, and thus the argument that these are bugs in the C compilers instead.

> Lints won't work when generics are involved.

The lint would probably have to happen on the actual usage in `extern "C" fn`s (either declarations or definitions) a la `improper_ctypes*`, and generics are fairly rare in those places.

Reviewer 8: > , I'm not convinced that there isn't a bunch of C code that is broken by this as well because they make the same assumption Rust does, and thus the argument that these are bugs in the C compilers instead.

IMO it's fairly clear that such code is buggy or at least non-portable C code. I see no basis for arguing that these C compilers are wrong. They are just strange.

> The lint would probably have to happen on the actual usage in extern "C" fns (either declarations or definitions) a la improper_ctypes*, and generics are fairly rare in those places.

That's best-effort since not all types that cross the ABI boundary might be visible there (passing around `void*` and casting later is a common idiom after all).

Reviewer 2: imo `repr(psABI)` is a terrible name, since that's way more obscure than `C`, I wouldn't expect even decent C and Rust programmers to know what it is.

Reviewer 8: We only have two options:
- Change what `repr(C)` means.  Can be done over an edition, but will still break copying any old material.
- Consider `repr(C)` "burnt" at least for all cases where the C layout is different from `repr(ordered_fields)`, and come up with a different name, which will be terrible.

Reviewer 7: I think I saw someone propose `repr(system)` somewhere, but I don’t remember who exactly.

Reviewer 8: That was meant to have a slightly different meaning, just like `extern "systems"` (which already exists) is not the same as `extern "C"`.

If *any* extern block or function (including `extern "Rust"`) is used in the crate, then this lint will not be triggered. This way, we don't have too many false positives for this lint. However, the lint should *not* suggest adding a `extern` block or function, since the problem is likely the `repr`.

This does miss one potential use case, where a crate provides a suite of FFI-capable types, but does not actually provide any `extern` functions or blocks. This should be an extremely small minority of crates, and they can silence this warning crate-wide.

The `suspicious_repr_c` lint takes precedence over `edition_2024_repr_c`.

```
warning: use of `repr(C)` in type `Foo`
  --> src/main.rs:14:10
   |
14 |     #[repr(C)]
   |       ^^^^^^^ help: consider switching to `repr(ordered_fields)`
   |     struct Foo {
   |
   = note: `#[warn(suspicious_repr_c)]` on by default
   = note: `repr(C)` is intended for FFI, and since there are no `extern` blocks or functions, it's likely that you meant to use `repr(ordered_fields)` to get a stable and consistent layout for your type
```

After enough time has passed, and the community has switched over:

> This makes it easier to tell *why* the `repr` was applied to a given struct. If `repr(C)`, it's about FFI and interop. If `repr(ordered_fields)`, then it's for a dependable layout.

Reviewer 8: What is this 2nd lint? When does it fire? What does it mean to "take precedence"? What changes about it after enough time has passed? I am confused by every part of this paragraph. ;)

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rfcs/3845/3955f9972618c76701a5b5693ed301eeef69d60b..5234c1d903d312a8305a821243a3567a82a67e52)*

Author: After rereading this section, I completely agree. I'll rework it.

### struct

When applying `repr(ordered_fields)` structs are laid out in memory in declaration order, with padding bytes added as necessary to preserve alignment.
The alignment of a struct is the same as the alignment of the most aligned field.

```rust
// assuming that u32 is aligned to 4 bytes
// size 16, align 4
#[repr(ordered_fields)]
struct FooStruct {
    a: u8,
    b: u32,
    c: u16,
    d: u32,
}
```

Would be laid out in memory like so

```
a...bbbbcc..dddd
```

### union

When applying `repr(ordered_fields)`, unions would be laid out as follows:
* the same alignment as their most aligned field
* the same size as their largest field, rounded up to the next multiple of the union's alignment
* all fields are at offset 0

```rust
// assuming that u32 is aligned to 4 bytes
// size 4, align 4
#[repr(ordered_fields)]
union FooUnion {
    a: u8,
    b: u32,
    c: u16,
    d: u32,
}
```

`FooUnion` has the same layout as `u32`, since `u32` has both the biggest size and alignment.

### enum

When applying `repr(ordered_fields)` to an enum, the enum's tag type and discriminant will be the same as when applying `repr(C)` to the enum in edition <= 2024.

> This does mean that the tag type will be platform-specific. To alleviate this concern, using `repr(ordered_fields)` on an enum without an explicit `repr(uN)`/`repr(iN)` will trigger a warning (name TBD).

Reviewer 8: This is just done to ease migration, right? Please add a note saying that.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rfcs/3845/3955f9972618c76701a5b5693ed301eeef69d60b..5234c1d903d312a8305a821243a3567a82a67e52)*

Author: I think with the discussion about `repr(edition2024#C)` and `repr(edition2027#C)` from the lang meeting, I will just make it a hard error to not specify a tag type. There shouldn't be any use-case for it, since if you are trying to match C's enums you should be using `repr(C)`/`repr(edition2024#C)` in edition 2027+.

> This warning should suggest the smallest integer type that can hold the discriminant values (preferring signed integers to break ties).

Reviewer 8: If the warning suggests a type in this way, it should also explain that this may actually change the layout.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rfcs/3845/3955f9972618c76701a5b5693ed301eeef69d60b..5234c1d903d312a8305a821243a3567a82a67e52)*

/// and returns the layout of the entire union
/// NOTE: all fields of the union are located at offset 0
fn get_layout_for_union(field_layouts: &[Layout]) -> Result<Layout, LayoutError> {
    let mut layout = Layout::new::<()>();
    
    for &field in field_layouts {
        layout = layout_max(layout, field)?;
    }
    
    Ok(layout.pad_to_align())
}

/// Takes in the layout of each variant (and their fields) (in declaration order), and returns the layout of the entire enum
/// the offsets of all fields of the enum are left as an exercise for the readers
/// NOTE: the enum tag is always at offset 0
fn get_layout_for_enum(
    // the discriminants may be negative for some enums
    // or u128::MAX for some enums, so there is no one primitive integer type that works. So BigInteger
    discriminants: &[BigInteger],
    variant_layouts: &[&[Layout]]
) -> Result<Layout, LayoutError> {
    assert_eq!(discriminants.len(), variant_layouts.len());

    let variant_data_layout = variant_layouts.iter()
        .try_fold(
            Layout::new::<()>(),
            |acc, variant_layout| Ok(layout_max(acc, get_layout_for_struct(variant_layout)?.1)?)

>         )?;

Reviewer 8: Can this use `get_layout_for_union`? That would be a lot more clear.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rfcs/3845/3955f9972618c76701a5b5693ed301eeef69d60b..5234c1d903d312a8305a821243a3567a82a67e52)*

    * Leaning towards no
* Is the ABI of `repr(ordered_fields)` specified (making it safe for FFI)? Or not?
    * discussion: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3845#discussion_r2291506953
* What should `repr(C)` do when a given type wouldn't compile in the corresponding `C` compiler (like fieldless structs in MSVC)? 
	* discussion: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3845#discussion_r2319138105
* <a id="ordered_fields_align"></a>Should `repr(ordered_fields, packed(N))` allow `align(M)` types where `M > N` (overaligned types).
	* discussion: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3845#discussion_r2319098177
	* One option is to allow it and cap those fields to be aligned to `N`. This seems consistent with the handling of other over-aligned types. (i.e. putting a `u32` in a `repr(packed(2))` type)
* Should unions expose some niches?
    * For example, if all variants of the union are structs that have a common prefix, then any niches of that common prefix could be exposed (i.e. in the enum case, making a union of structs behave more like an enum).

>     * This must be answered before stabilization, as it is set in stone after that

Reviewer 8: unions are already stable so I don't see the point of blocking this repr on that question.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rfcs/3845/3955f9972618c76701a5b5693ed301eeef69d60b..5234c1d903d312a8305a821243a3567a82a67e52)*

- Feature Name: `repr_ordered_fields`
- Start Date: 2025-08-05
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#3845](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3845)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Introduce a few new `repr`s (all names are placeholders and can be bikeshedded if this RFC is accepted):
* `repr(ordered_fields)`
* `repr(C#editionCurr)`
* `repr(C#editionNext)`

> And the meaning of `repr(C)` will change in the next edition (presumably `Edition 2027`). All the new reprs can be applied to `struct`, `enum`, and `union` types. 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The meaning of `repr(C)` will change from `C#editionCurr` in the current edition to `C#editionNext`  in the next edition (presumably `Edition 2027`). All the new reprs can be applied to `struct`, `enum`, and `union` types. 
```

> `repr(ordered_fields)`: provides a simple, predicable in memory layout for types. This RFC does *NOT* specify a stable ABI for `repr(ordered_fields)` - that should either be handled by a future RFC or another `repr`.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
`repr(ordered_fields)`: provides a simple, predicable in-memory layout for types. This RFC does *NOT* specify a stable ABI for `repr(ordered_fields)` - that should either be handled by a future RFC or another `repr`.
```

Layout-wise, this is the same as `repr(C)` on all current editions where both compile.

`repr(C#editionCurr)`: the same as `repr(C)` on all current editions. This will preserve the same layout and ABI as `repr(C)` on current editions. This repr is mainly targeted for use during the transition time. This way we can do an automated fix for `repr(C)` -> `repr(C#editionCurr)`, and you will know that this was done by an automated fix. If we used `repr(ordered_fields)` for this purpose, then it would be ambiguous if that was intentional or automated.

> `repr(C#editionNext)`: the same as `repr(C)` on the next edition. This repr is mainly targeted for use during the transition time. This `repr` should *only* be used for FFI. This serves the dual purpose of `repr(C#editionCurr)`, it allows piecemeal migration to the new edition while staying on the old edition. This `repr` should *only* be used for FFI.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
`repr(C#editionNext)`: the same as `repr(C)` on the next edition. This repr is mainly targeted for use during the transition time. This `repr` should *only* be used for FFI. This serves the dual purpose of `repr(C#editionCurr)`, it allows piecemeal migration to the new edition while staying on the old edition.
```
No need to say this twice in the same paragraph. ;)

Introduce a few new warnings and errors
1. A error when `repr(ordered_fields)` is used on enums without the tag type specified.
2. An edition migration warning, when updating to the next edition, that the meaning of `repr(C)` is changing. This will have an automated fix to `repr(C#editionCurr)`
3. A warn-by-default lint when `repr(C)` is used, and there are no `extern` blocks or functions in the crate (on all editions)
4. An idiom lint when `repr(C#editionNext)` is used on the next edition, with an automated fix to `repr(C)`.
5. An idiom lint when `repr(C#editionCurr)` is used on the next edition. No automated fix is provided, instead the lint should guide users to choose between `repr(C)` or `repr(ordered_fields)`

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Currently `repr(C)` serves two roles:
1. Provide a consistent, cross-platform, predictable layout for a given type
2. Match the target C compiler's struct/union layout algorithm and ABI

But in some cases, these two roles are in tension due to platform's C layout not matching the [simple, general algorithm](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/type-layout.html#r-layout.repr.c.struct.size-field-offset) Rust always uses:

> * On MSVC, a struct with a single field that is a zero-sized array has size 1. (https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/81996)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* On MSVC, a struct with a single field that is a zero-sized array has non-zero size. (https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/81996)
```

It's not size 1; it depends on the element type, but in a super weird way that I don't fully understand.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rfcs/3845/3955f9972618c76701a5b5693ed301eeef69d60b..806a16de363e3e554e2f00e87e5220fb6116eda1)*

## AIX: f64 alignment

For AIX, the issue is that `f64` is sometimes treated as aligned to 8 bytes and sometimes as aligned to 4 bytes (the comments indicate the desired layout as computed by a C compiler):
```rust
// Size: 24
#[repr(C)]
struct Floats {
  a: f64, // at offset 0
  b: u8, // at offset 8
  c: f64, // at offset 12
}
```
There is no way to obtain such a layout using Rust's `repr(C)` layout algorithm. Currently, `c`is at offset `16`, and the size is `24` bytes. If we simply lower the alignment of `f64` to 4, we'll get the right offsets, but the size will be `20` bytes. So either way, we'll need to adjust the rules for `repr(C)` to get a proper fix.
For more details, see this discussion on [irlo](https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/repr-c-aix-struct-alignment/21594/3).

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

`repr(ordered_fields)` is a new representation that can be applied to `struct`, `enum`, and `union` to give them a consistent, cross-platform, and predictable in-memory layout.

> `repr(C)` in current editions is an alias for `repr(C#editionCurr)` and in all other editions, it matches the default C compiler for the given target triple for structs, unions, and field-less enums. Enums with fields are laid out as a struct containing a tag and payload. With the payload being a union of structs of all the variants. This is how they are currently laid out in `repr(C)`. The calling convention of `repr(C)` will also remain the same and all current editions.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
`repr(C)` in current editions is an alias for `repr(C#editionCurr)` and in all future editions, it matches the default C compiler for the given target triple for structs, unions, and field-less enums. Enums with fields are laid out as a struct containing a tag and payload. With the payload being a union of structs of all the variants. This is how they are currently laid out in `repr(C)`. The calling convention of `repr(C)` will also remain the same and all current editions.
```

Reviewer 10: > The calling convention of `repr(C)` will also remain the same and all current editions.

Not sure if this is meant to be "remain the same in all current editions" or "remain the same in current and future editions".

Author: I think this section is just wrong. I'll rework it, it shouldn't be saying that `repr(C#editionCurr)` matches a C compiler.

> `repr(C)` in future editions is an alias for `repr(C#editionNext)`. It will lay out types in the same way as `C` would, and will use the same calling convention as `C`.

Reviewer 8: This and the previous paragraph seem to both be describing `repr(C)`? It's a bit confusing.

I would suggest:
- first explain `C#current`
- then explain `C#next`
- and then you can explain `C` as simply picking one or the other depending on the edition

* fix uses of `repr(C#editionCurr)` at their leisure, then update to new edition
* update to new edition, then fix uses of `repr(C#editionCurr)` at their leisure

Here's an example of how the lint could look
```
warning: use of `repr(C)` in type `Foo`
  --> src/main.rs:14:10
   |
14 |     #[repr(C)]
   |       ^^^^^^^ help: consider switching to `repr(C#editionNext)` or `repr(ordered_fields)`
   |     struct Foo {
   |
   = note: `#[warn(edition_2024_repr_c)]` on by default
   = note: `repr(C)` is planned to change meaning in the next edition to match the target platform's layout algorithm. This may change the layout of this type on certain platforms. To keep the current layout, switch to `repr(C#editionNext)` or `repr(ordered_fields)`
```

Using `repr(C)`/`repr(C#editionCurr)`/`repr(C#editionNext)` on all editions (including in future editions) when there are no extern blocks or functions in the crate will trigger a allow-by-default lint (`suspicious_repr_c`) suggesting to use `repr(ordered_fields)`.

> This is allow by default to reduce noise, since the edition lint should do the heavy lifting. This is still provided as a tool for interested users to reduce their reliance on `repr(C)` (or it's variants) when it is probably not needed. Since the largest difference between `repr(C)` and `repr(ordered_fields)` is calling convention.

Reviewer 8: The last sentence here ("Since ...") isn't a full sentence grammatically, and I also don't understand what exactly you are trying to say.

Reviewer 10: Grammar nitpick
```suggestion
This is allow by default to reduce noise, since the edition lint should do the heavy lifting. This is still provided as a tool for interested users to reduce their reliance on `repr(C)` (or its variants) when it is probably not needed. Since the largest difference between `repr(C)` and `repr(ordered_fields)` is calling convention.
```

Author: I started a thought, and it looks like I failed to finish or edited in the middle. I'll update this accordingly.

   = note: `repr(C)` is intended for FFI, and since there are no `extern` blocks or functions, it's likely that you meant to use `repr(ordered_fields)` to get a stable and consistent layout for your type.
```

The idiom lint `repr_c_curr` will trigger on usages of `repr(C#editionCurr)`. This is allow-by-default on current editions and warn by default on new editions.
* On the current edition it will guide people towards `repr(C#editionNext)` or `repr(ordered_fields)`.
* On future current editions it will guide people towards `repr(C)` or `repr(ordered_fields)`.

The idiom lint `repr_c_next` will trigger on usages of `repr(C#editionNext)`. This is allow-by-default on current editions and deny-by-default/warn-by-default in future editions. This comes with a machine applicable fix to switch to `repr(C)`.

After enough time has passed, and the community has switched over:
This makes it easier to tell *why* the `repr` was applied to a given struct. If `repr(C)`, it's about FFI and interop. If `repr(ordered_fields)`, then it's for a dependable layout unrelated to FFI.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## `repr(C#editionCurr)`

> Note: This will be identical to `repr(C)` on current editions.

Reviewer 8: It's odd to *start* with a note. This should start by describing the repr, and then maybe one can add a note to that.

Author: I understand, and normally I would put notes at the end.

However, I think keeping the overall structure consistent across sections makes this easier to read. So I would opt to either put them all at the beginning of each section or at the end of each section. But `repr(ordered_fields)`'s section is super long, so putting it's note at the end would be counter-productive. So, to be consistent, I kept them all at the beginning.

These notes are just for the RFC and provides context for why decisions were made. So I think it's more useful for them to come first. They are not intended to be a part of the reference. (This is how I've used notes throughout the RFC)

Reviewer 8: All I can say is that the current structure is very confusing and makes it harder to understand the RFC. I would strongly recommend to adjust it.

For discriminants, this means that it will follow the given algorithm for each variant in declaration order of the variants:
* if a variant has an explicit discriminant value, then that value is assigned
* else if this is the first variant in declaration order, then the discriminant is zero
* else the discriminant value is one more than the previous variant's discriminant (in declaration order)

If an enum doesn't have any fields, then it is represented exactly by its discriminant.
```rust
// tag = i16
// represented as i16
#[repr(ordered_fields, i16)]
enum FooEnum {
    VarA = 1,
    VarB, // discriminant = 2
    VarC = 500,
    VarD, // discriminant = 501
}

// tag = u16
// represented as u16
#[repr(ordered_fields, u16)]
enum FooEnumUnsigned {
    VarA = 1,
    VarB, // discriminant = 2
    VarC = 500,
    VarD, // discriminant = 501
}
```

Enums with fields will be laid out as if they were a struct containing the tag and a union of structs containing the data.
NOTE: This is different from `repr(iN)`/`repr(uN)` which are laid out as a union of structs, where the first field of the struct is the tag.

> These two layouts are *NOT* compatible, and adding `repr(ordered_fields)` to `repr(iN)`/`repr(uN)` changes the layout of the enum!

Reviewer 6: Currently, on an `enum` with fields:

- `repr(C)` results in a `repr(C)` struct containing a `repr(C)` union ([reference](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/type-layout.html?search=#r-layout.repr.c.adt))
- `repr(iN/uN)` results in a `repr(C)` union of `repr(C)` structs ([reference](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/type-layout.html?search=#r-layout.repr.primitive.adt))

With this RFC, what should `repr(iN/uN)` do on the new edition? Does it still use `repr(C)`—and if so, which one?

---

Personally, I think this whole thing is an incredibly confusing mess, and we should fix it properly on the new edition:

- For enums without fields, or where all fields are 1-ZST that are trivial for the purpose of `repr(transparent)`:
   - `repr(iN/uN)` and `repr(ordered_fields, iN/uN)` use the specified integer type
   - `repr(C)` uses the default C enum tag type
- For all enums:
   - `repr(C, struct_of_union)` gives you a `repr(C)` struct containing a `repr(C)` union. You can optionally specify `uN`/`iN` as the tag type
   - `repr(C, union_of_structs)` gives you a `repr(C)` union containing `repr(C)` structs. You can optionally specify `uN`/`iN` as the tag type
   - `struct_of_union` or `union_of_structs` can also be used with `repr(ordered_fields)`, desugaring to `repr(ordered_fields)` structs and unions. You are required to specify `uN`/`iN` as the tag type in this case
   -  `C` or `ordered_fields` without `struct_of_union` or `union_of_structs` is an error (except for fieldless enums as specified earlier); `struct_of_union` or `union_of_structs` without `C` or `ordered_fields` is an error; `uN`/`iN` without all of these is an error (except for fieldless enums as specified earlier)

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rfcs/3845/3955f9972618c76701a5b5693ed301eeef69d60b..cd2d51a044a32eb5c601b946ad1ab942461056dd)*

Author: Oh, nice find, I didn't realize that `repr(uN)`/`repr(iN)` was specified in terms of `repr(C)`.

I think that's much lower priority, so for now just specifying bare `repr(int)` in terms of `repr(C#reprCurrent)` would be fine (preserving the current behavior). Note that for structs and unions, `repr(C#reprCurrent)` and `repr(ordered_fields)` are identical, so layout wise there isn't a difference if we used `repr(ordered_fields)` here either. But there is a difference in that `repr(C#reprCurrent)` has a specified ABI (whatever Rust is doing right now), where as `repr(ordered_fields)` doesn't. And since `repr(int)` is considered FFI safe, we need to use `repr(C#reprCurrent)`.

For users that need a real `C` layout, they can just use unions and structs with `repr(C)` on the new edition or use `repr(C, int)` (and adapt their code to the new layout). The only major loss is either pattern matching, or some work to adapt the to the new layout.
I think using `repr(int)` on an enum with data in FFI is very uncommon due to soundness concerns (overwriting the tag would easily cause UB if that enum is ever passed back to Rust). So this justifies making it a second class citizen in the FFI case.

A future RFC can handle this better if there is sufficient motivation.

> These two layouts are *NOT* compatible, and adding `repr(ordered_fields)` to `repr(iN)`/`repr(uN)` changes the layout of the enum!

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
These two layouts are *NOT* compatible, and adding `repr(ordered_fields)` to `repr(iN)`/`repr(uN)` changes the layout of the enum! This may be surprising, but it matches precedent -- adding `repr(C)` to `repr(iN)`/`repr(uN)` has a similar effect.
```
Is this correct?

Author: Yes, this is correct. It's also why `repr(ordered_fields)` has this behavior

/// and returns the layout of the entire enum the offsets of all fields of
/// the enum are left as an exercise for the readers
/// NOTE: the enum tag is always at offset 0
fn get_layout_for_enum(
    // the discriminants may be negative for some enums
    // or u128::MAX for some enums, so there is no one primitive integer type that works. So BigInteger
    discriminants: &[BigInteger],
    variant_layouts: &[&[Layout]]
) -> Result<Layout, LayoutError> {
    assert_eq!(discriminants.len(), variant_layouts.len());

    // each variant's fields are represented as a struct
    let variant_data_layouts = variant_layouts.iter()
        .map(|variant_fields_layout| get_layout_for_struct(variant_fields_layout).map(|x| x.1))
        .collect::<Result<Vec<_>, _>>()?;

    // then the set of all variants is represented as a union
    let variant_data_layout = get_layout_for_union(variant_data_layouts)?;

    let tag_layout = get_layout_for_tag(discriminants);

    // the tag is then prepended to that union
    let (_, layout) = get_layout_for_struct(&[
        tag_layout,
        variant_data_layout
    ])?;

    Ok(layout)
}
```

### `packed`

> When `repr(ordered_fields, packed(N))` is applied to a struct, any field who's type has an alignment > `N` has it's alignment capped to `N`. Even if that type has a `repr(align(M))` attribute applied. Otherwise the rules are the same as described above.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
When `repr(ordered_fields, packed(N))` is applied to a struct, any field who's type has an alignment > `N` has its alignment capped to `N`. This applies even if that type has a `repr(align(M))` attribute applied. Otherwise, the rules are the same as described above.
```

Reviewer 10: Two extra grammar changes:
- whose not who's
- but "who" is for people, objects get "which/that", but in this case that's clunky, so I used "with"

```suggestion
When `repr(ordered_fields, packed(N))` is applied to a struct, any field with a type with alignment > `N` has its alignment capped to `N`. This applies even if that type has a `repr(align(M))` attribute applied. Otherwise, the rules are the same as described above.
```

  c: f64, // at offset 12
}
```
There is no way to obtain such a layout using Rust's `repr(C)` layout algorithm. Currently, `c`is at offset `16`, and the size is `24` bytes. If we simply lower the alignment of `f64` to 4, we'll get the right offsets, but the size will be `20` bytes. So either way, we'll need to adjust the rules for `repr(C)` to get a proper fix.
For more details, see this discussion on [irlo](https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/repr-c-aix-struct-alignment/21594/3).

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

`repr(ordered_fields)` is a new representation that can be applied to `struct`, `enum`, and `union` to give them a consistent, cross-platform, and predictable in-memory layout.

`repr(C#editionCurr)` is the same as `repr(C)` on current editions. It lays out
* `struct` fields in order, while ensuring that they are well aligned
* `union` fields at offset 0
* field-less `enum`s as an implementation defined integer
* general `enum`s as a struct of a tag and a union. Where each field of the union is a struct containing each field of the variants. (NOTE: this is how they are handled in `repr(C)` in current editions)

> `repr(C#editionNext)` will be defined as the same as what the `C` compiler of the given target would do (both in terms of layout and calling convention).

Reviewer 11: It seems like the intended process for this RFC is to have the RFC make the minimal changes  that will allow `#[repr(ordered_fields)]` to be added, while everything about `#[repr(C#editionNext)]` would be specified externally. But, as comments showed, there are still some universal things that need to be specified for `#[repr(C#editionNext)]`:

* Is a `#[repr(C#editionCurr)]` field allowed in a `#[repr(C#editionNext)]` type?
* Now to handle non-array`#[repr(Rust)]` ZST fields in a `#[repr(C#editionNext)]` type?
* What is the syntactic mapping between Rust and C for flexible array members?

Is it desired to resolve these issues in this RFC, or is there another place (where) to have that discussion?

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rfcs/3845/3955f9972618c76701a5b5693ed301eeef69d60b..68b61b057d37da9c8815a80ebc382a45704bf9e6)*

Author: I understand wanting to specify as much as possible, especially since FFI is such a tricky topic already.

> Is a `#[repr(C#editionCurr)]` field allowed in a `#[repr(C#editionNext)]` type?

Yes, and in cases where they agree there will be no issues. In cases where they disagree... 

> Now to handle non-array#[repr(Rust)] ZST fields in a #[repr(C#editionNext)] type?

If they are 1-ZSTs they can be ignored entirely, if they have a non-trivial alignment, then this can be treated like a `T field[0]` field in `C` (provided `T` as the same alignment as the ZST. I think these two should be equivalent on any reasonable C compiler (and all current C compilers). But correct me if I'm wrong.

But I don't think we need to specify non-trivial aligned ZSTs. Since they don't exists in C. If there is sufficient motivation for them, they can be specified later.

> What is the syntactic mapping between Rust and C for flexible array members?

I think following current recommendations is probably best, so a trailing field of type `[T; 0]`. I understand that you like the idea of using `[T]`, but slices are very different from flexible length array members. Slices have a well defined length, and can only be pointed to by a fat pointer. Flexible length arrays have an unknown length, and all pointers to then are thin (since all pointers are thin in `C`). These differences are significant enough, that I don't think we should conflate the two.

It may be a good idea to introduce a unsized type specifically for flexible length array members, but that's a different discussion entirely. For this RFC, following current norms is sufficient.

> No. See https://rust-lang.github.io/rust-bindgen/using-fam.html#using-dynamically-sized-types, for example.

I don't think this says what you think it says. It's still using `[T; 0]` to represent flexible length array members for FFI, but trying to provide a cleaner interface when you are on the Rust side.

Reviewer 11: > > Now to handle non-array#[repr(Rust)] ZST fields in a #[repr(C#editionNext)] type?
> 
> If they are 1-ZSTs they can be ignored entirely, 

This sounds great to me.

> if they have a non-trivial alignment, then this can be treated like a `T field[0]` field in `C` (provided `T` as the same alignment as the ZST.  I think these two should be equivalent on any reasonable C compiler (and all current C compilers). But correct me if I'm wrong. But I don't think we need to specify non-trivial aligned ZSTs. Since they don't exists in C. If there is sufficient motivation for them, they can be specified later.

I agree.

> > What is the syntactic mapping between Rust and C for flexible array members?
> 
> I think following current recommendations is probably best, so a trailing field of type `[T; 0]`. I understand that you like the idea of using `[T]`, but slices are very different from flexible length array members.

Sorry, I am not following. We already have to map `[T]` to flexible array members, right From https://google.github.io/zerocopy/zerocopy/trait.KnownLayout.html#dynamiNcally-sized-types:

```rust
#[repr(C)]
struct PacketHeader {
    ...
}

#[repr(C)]
struct Packet {
    header: PacketHeader,
    body: [u8],
}
```

Is this not exactly the Rust encoding of C flexible array members already today? Again, sorry if I'm missing something obvious here.

> > No. See https://rust-lang.github.io/rust-bindgen/using-fam.html#using-dynamically-sized-types, for example.
> 
> I don't think this says what you think it says. It's still using `[T; 0]` to represent flexible length array members for FFI, but trying to provide a cleaner interface when you are on the Rust side.

Specifically, I was referring to this:

> ```
> pub unsafe fn flex_ref(&self, len: usize) -> &MyRecord<[::std::os::raw::c_char]> { ... }
> pub unsafe fn flex_mut_ref(&mut self, len: usize) -> &mut MyRecord<[::std::os::raw::c_char]> { ... }
> ```
    
Where the field type is actually the slice DST `[c_char]`.

Reviewer 6: > Is this not exactly the Rust encoding of C flexible array members already today? Again, sorry if I'm missing something obvious here.

*Both* `[T]` and `[T; 0]` should map to flexible array members, because both are commonly used to represent them. The former is used when you want a fat pointer with checked indexing, the latter when you want a thin pointer to match C.

Author: It would probably be fine to say that `[T; N]` is compatible with `[T]` when they are in the last field of a `struct`, and allow unsizing from `Foo<[T; N]>` to `Foo<[T]>`. Where `Foo` is a `repr(C#editionNext)` `struct` that has `T` as it's last field.

Of course, `Foo<[T]>` doesn't have a well defined ABI, and neither does a pointer to it. So they can't be used directly in FFI. But I think that should be fine for the use-cases you have shown.

I'm not so sure about general unsizing though (like to `dyn` traits), especially since that has more ways to conflict with the `C` layout. So maybe array -> slice unsizing is the only one that should be allowed for `repr(C#editionNext)` `struct`s?

Reviewer 6: > It would probably be fine to say that `[T; N]` is compatible with `[T]` when they are in the last field of a `struct`, and allow unsizing from `Foo<[T; N]>` to `Foo<[T]>`. Where `Foo` is a `repr(C#editionNext)` `struct` that has `T` as it's last field.

For `N != 0`, I'm not sure we can assume that the C layout will be equivalent to a FAM. At minimum, someone would need to check what current compilers do.

Reviewer 8: > It would probably be fine to say that [T; N] is compatible with [T]

Those two types don't have the same *sizedness*, let alone the same size, to asking about their compatibility seems entirely meaningless?

Author: > Those two types don't have the same sizedness, let alone the same size, to asking about their compatibility seems entirely meaningless?

It seems perfectly sensible if you include the context that I'm also talking about unsizing coercion in the same sentence. That unsizing coercion wouldn't be possible if the array field's offset depended on the length of the array. (Since the offset of the slice field shouldn't depend on it's length).

So we need to rule out that possibility. That's what I meant by `[T; N]` is compatible with `[T]`.

I think that all current C compilers follow this rule, but I don't think the C standard demands it. So this may be something which will need to be worked out there before it can be implemented in Rust.

Reviewer 8: I don't know what you even mean by layout compatibility of those two types. The definitions of layout compatibility I am aware of do not make sense here, your claim doesn't even typecheck under those definitions.

Reviewer 6: He means that given,

```rust
#[repr(C)]
struct Foo<T: ?Sized> {
    bar: i32,
    baz: f64,
    quux: T,
}
```

He wants `Foo<[T; N]>` and `Foo<[T]>` to have the same field offsets.

Author: Ok, maybe an example will help clarify what I mean. 

```rust
#[repr(C#editionNext)]
struct WithArray<T, U, const N: size> {
    header: T,
    data_array: [U; N]
}

#[repr(C#editionNext)]
struct WithSlice<T, U> {
    header: T,
    data_slice: [U], // let's assume that the offset of this field can't depend on it's length
}

pub fn cast_to_with_array_mut<T, U, const N: usize>(packet: &mut WithSlice<T, U>) -> &mut WithArray<T, U, N> {
    assert!(packet.data_slice.len() == N);
    unsafe { &mut *core::ptr::form_mut(packet).cast() }
}
```

Is `cast_to_with_array_mut` sound? And is the reverse cast (from `&mut WithArray<T, U, N>` to `&mut WithSlice<T, U>` sound?

If the answer to both questions is yes, then we could say that they are compatible.

I think a strict reading on the C standard would say they are not sound, but I think it should be sound wrt all current C compilers.

Reviewer 6: For context, this compiles today:

```rust
#[repr(C)]
struct Foo<T: ?Sized> {
    bar: i32,
    baz: f64,
    quux: T,
}

fn foo(a: &Foo<[u32; 42]>) {
    let _: &Foo<[u32]> = a;
}
```

Reviewer 8: > For context, this compiles today:

Yeah, so on a single type, unsizing has to work. Given that these repr's are all deterministic, that pretty much means `WithArray` and `WithSlice` need to put `data_*` at the same offset.

The main thing that's questionable here is even allowing unsized tails for `repr(C#editionNext)`. C doesn't have anything comparable, so arguably we should just reject them? We cannot lay them out like the C compiler does, after all.

Reviewer 6: Again, we can map them to flexible array members.

Bindgen relies on this coercion working. So, avoid making the transition too onerous, I think we should just say that the coercion works on `C#editionNext`—and if on some future target, the C compiler's layout isn't compatible with that, then we reject it only on that target. I don't think it's worth it to force a painful migration for everyone now, just to avoid a small risk that hypothetically maybe crates that want to support a niche target might need to do the same painful migration later.

(This is all conditional on there being no issues for our *current* targets. Which I *believe* is the case, but again, someone needs to check)

Reviewer 8: > Again, we can map them to flexible array members.

Ah, that's what you meant. So to be clear, the idea is that 
```rust
#[repr(C#editionNext)]
struct WithSlice {
    header: T,
    data_slice: [U],
}
```
has its offsets computed to match this C type:
```c
struct WithSlice {
  T header;
  U[] data_slice;
}
```
That sounds reasonable to me if none of the assembled C layout experts can find a problem with it.

Reviewer 2: > has its offsets computed to match this C type:
> 
> ```c
> struct WithSlice {
>   T header;
>   U[] data_slice;
> }
> ```

I think you mean:
```c
struct WithSlice {
  T header;
  U data_slice[];
};
```

Reviewer 8: Yeah I think I do, I entirely forgot how to read and write C's ridiculous type syntax.

Author: I've posted about this on LLVM's discourse: https://discourse.llvm.org/t/layout-of-flexible-array-members/91191

1. If they come back with it must be true by the C standard, then this could be allowed unconditionally.
2. If this is not true by the C standard, but is true on all major compilers (which I assume is the case), then this could be allowed with a flag (maybe a `target_feature`?).
3. If this is not true on all major compilers, then this shouldn't be allowed at all (but I highly doubt this is the case, given that bindgen is relying on this)

Reviewer 8: > If this is not true by the C standard, but is true on all major compilers (which I assume is the case), then this could be allowed with a flag (maybe a target_feature?).

If we can't imagine a plausible platform breaking it, we should just add it to the list of platform assumptions we make. Rust does not try to be as portable as C.

Author: One person responded, saying that they didn't know of any compiler which would give array members a different offset from flexible array members. But that it's not backed up by the C standard.

So I'll add this as a guarantee that `repr(C#editionNext)` will also provide, that array and slice fields will be at the same offset, which allows coercions. I'll also leave a note that this adds to the list of platform assumptions.

How should we handle `dyn` traits? I think we should have a post-mono error for them as a fallback error, and a normal error whenever possible. Since it doesn't make sense to put a `dyn` trait in a `repr(C#editionNext)` type.

Reviewer 6: > How should we handle `dyn` traits?

The same way we currently do—by triggering [`improper_ctypes`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustc/lints/listing/warn-by-default.html#improper-ctypes) or [`improper_ctypes_definitions`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustc/lints/listing/warn-by-default.html#improper-ctypes-definitions) as appropriate.

Author: That doesn't handle generics, consider this. There's no where to lint, but we could do a post-mono error in `fn bar()`.

```rust
#[repr(C#editionNext)]
struct Foo<T: ?Sized> {
    header: i32,
    data: T,
}

// in some other crate

pub fn with_foo<T: ?Sized>() {
    let _: Option<&Foo<T>> = None;
}

// in some other crate

pub fn bar() {
    with_foo::<dyn Trait>();
}
```

I guess another option is to ban the coercion from `Foo<T>` to `Foo<dyn Trait>`, then assign some arbitrary layout for `Foo<dyn Trait>` with no stability guarantees in this case. And where the `dyn Trait` is explicitly in a `repr(C#editionNext)` struct, it's a hard error.

Reviewer 11: > So I'll add this as a guarantee that `repr(C#editionNext)` will also provide, that array and slice fields will be at the same offset, which allows coercions. I'll also leave a note that this adds to the list of platform assumptions.

The last draft of the ISO C standard I have says three things that are relevant:

> "[T] he size of the structure is as if the flexible array member were omitted except that it may have more trailing padding than the omission would imply." 

Not sure what would be needed to account for this difference in padding, but this extra padding is basically the MSVC behavior; its `field T[0];` seems to really just be an alternate syntax for flexible array members.

> "[W]hen a. (or ->) operator has a left operand that is (a pointer to) a structure with a flexible array member and the right operand names that member, it behaves as if that member were replaced with the longest array (with the same element type) that would not make the structure larger than the object being accessed; the offset of the array shall remain that of the flexible array member, even if this would differ from that of the replacement array."

This seems to imply to me that coercions work like they do in Rust.

>  If this array would have no elements, it behaves
as if it had one element but the behavior is undefined if any attempt is made to access that element or to generate a pointer one past it.

AFAICT, this is there to deal with the fact that there are no zero-sized fields in C.

Author: > > "[W]hen a. (or ->) operator has a left operand that is (a pointer to) a structure with a flexible array member and the right operand names that member, it behaves as if that member were replaced with the longest array (with the same element type) that would not make the structure larger than the object being accessed; the offset of the array shall remain that of the flexible array member, even if this would differ from that of the replacement array."
>
> This seems to imply to me that coercions work like they do in Rust.

Not quite, for example if we had

```C
struct WithArray {
  uint32_t header;
  uint16_t data_array[4];
};
```

It would be legal to put `data_array` at offset 8 (and align the whole struct to 8 bytes). But it was a flexible array member, it would be forced to be at offset 4, since the size of the type without the FAM is 4 bytes. Thus the coercion wouldn't be legal.

Reviewer 11: > But it was a flexible array member, it would be forced to be at offset 4, since the size of the type without the FAM is 4 bytes.

(Did you mean `uint64_t` instead of `uint16_t`?)

If we have this:

```c
struct WithFam {
  uint32_t header;
  uint16_t data_array[]; // FAM
};
```
Then `data_array` is allowed to have any offset >= 4 because of the "except that it may have more trailing padding than the omission would imply" in the spec.

But, I understand and agree with your general point that the offset of `data_array` might differ between `WithFam` and `WithArray`. 

What would be ideal would be to have something like this:

```rust
#[repr(C#editionNext)]
struct WithFam<T: core::ffi::CoerceFlexibleArrayMember<u16>> {
  header: u32,
  data_array: T::Field,
};

// In `core::ffi`

pub trait CoerceFlexibleArrayMember<T>  {
    type Field: ?Sized + Unsize<[T]>;
}

impl<T> CoerceFlexibleArrayMember<T> for [T] {
    type Field = Self;
}

impl<T, const N: usize> CoerceFlexibleArrayMember<T> for [u16; N] {
     type Field = ArrayAsFlexibleMember<T, N>;
}

// The compiler would need special logic to lay out this according to the
// C compiler's interpretation of the FAM rules.
#[repr(C#editionNext)]
pub struct ArrayAsFlexibleMember<T, const N: usize>([T; N]);

impl<type T, const N: usize> {Deref, DerefMut, Unsize<[T]>} for ArrayAsFlexibleMember<T, N> { ... }
```

Author: > What would be ideal would be to have something like this:

That seems to be a lot of complexity for such a niche use-case, and it would make it harder to use flexible array members in Rust. Given that most compilers don't have the problem that the C spec does, I think it's fine to just be less permissive that the C spec, and only support compilers which do lay out array members and flexible array members at the same offset.

Note that the niche use cases here is:
* you have a flexible array member
* you want to do FFI in Rust
* the compiler you are using doesn't always layout array members and flexible array members at the same offset

with point 3 being load-bearing, and extremely niche if it exists at all.

> (Did you mean uint64_t instead of uint16_t?)

no, I meant `uint16_t` since over-aligning a field is perfectly legal. (and we see this in actual compilers, as described in the RFC text)

> But, I understand and agree with your general point that the offset of data_array might differ between WithFam and WithArray.

:+1: with one more point, that for array members, the offset could depend on the length, but I don't think that's possible for flexible array members. So it's not guaranteed that they always share an offset.

---

tldr: I think that avoiding all this complexity justifies just raising the platform requirements, esp. since all major compilers lay out array members and flexible array members at the same offset

Reviewer 6: Again, there is also the middle position of allowing the coercion on all current targets, but documenting that some future targets might not support it (and that `unsafe` code can't assume the layout matches without checking). That way, we don't completely lock Rust out of supporting platforms that don't uphold the assumption.

Reviewer 8: That's a lot of fuzz for a target that doesn't exist. We can easily get lost in tons of hypotheticals around weird targets. I'd rather delay such discussions until such a target actually comes up.

Reviewer 6: That's the point, to allow us to delay the discussion instead of forcing the issue now and locking us out forever

Reviewer 8: Given that you apparently want to discuss this now, we must have different definitions of what "delay the discussion" means. ;)

Reviewer 6: If we document now that this coercion is guaranteed to always work and that the layouts will always match, then `unsafe` code could rely on it, so it will be difficult/impossible to ever take back even for new targets. If we hedge now, and require `unsafe` authors to assert before relying on it, we avoid that risk

Reviewer 11: > Again, there is also the middle position of allowing the coercion on all current targets, but documenting that some future targets might not support it (and that `unsafe` code can't assume the layout matches without checking). That way, we don't completely lock Rust out of supporting platforms that don't uphold the assumption.

Alternatively, just restrict the coercion to situations where the offset of the field would not change between `[T]` and `[T; N]`. If there is ever a target added where that restriction is too strict, then an RFC could be written to add machinery more like what I mentioned above.

For these other use-cases, this RFC should make it possible to upgrade to the new edition and get the behavior you want. But it may require more work or it may not look as pretty (after all the bikeshedding for this RFC is done).

This is justified because it is expected that these two major cases will cover the vast majority of cases seen in the wild.

### Layout issues

Before we delve into the proposed solution, we go into a little more detail about the aforementioned platform layout issues.
Some of them cannot be solved with this RFC alone, but all of them have require some approach to split up the two roles of `repr(C)`.
Since this RFC is trying to be the minimal fix to split `repr(C)`, any fix will either depend on this RFC or contain this RFC as part of the fix. Accepting this RFC will provide an incremental upgrade to the situation.

## MSVC: zero-length arrays

On Windows MSVC, `repr(C)` doesn't always match what MSVC does for ZST structs (see this [issue](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/81996) for more details)

```rust
// should have size 8, but has size 0
#[repr(C)]
struct SomeFFI([i64; 0]);
```

> Of course, making `SomeFFI` size 8 doesn't work for anyone using `repr(C)` for role 1. They want it to be size 0 (as it currently is). 

Reviewer 11: The following compiles successfully with MSVC v19.51, so I am not sure why `8` is mentioned instead of `4`.

```c
#include <assert.h>
#include <stdint.h>

// Not ISO C: Zero-length array not allowed.
// Not ISO C: FAM without another field ahead of it.
struct Foo {
    int64_t a[0];
};

static_assert(sizeof(struct Foo) == 4);
```

Note that `int64_t a[0];` seems to be just an alternative syntax for a FAM in MSVC; it doesn't support zero-length arrays except as the last field. So this is just an instance of the ISO C idea that there are no zero-sized types (including arrays with length zero), and the clause that a struct with a FAM might have padding beyond what the struct would have if the FAM isn't there.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rfcs/3845/3955f9972618c76701a5b5693ed301eeef69d60b..7a20567d4ebaf1fcd0bdf218e1f362445f0f6a37)*

Author: Sure, I can adjust the size. Doesn't really change the point, which is that in `C` it has a non-zero size.

Reviewer 6: Rust requires alignment to have a multiple of size, though! MSVC's behavior here is just incredibly cursed (https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/81996#issuecomment-4382558266), and I'm not sure what to do about it, other than asking for an upvote on https://developercommunity.visualstudio.com/t/C-structs-containing-only-a-flexible-arr/11086085

Reviewer 8: How does such a "size 4, align 8" struct behave when it is used in other types, like as fields of another structs or in an array?

Reviewer 8: > C++ is unaffected

Wait, so the same type declaration produces a different result in MSVC++?!

Reviewer 6: > Wait, so the same type declaration produces a different result in MSVC++?!

That's the *least* surprising part. `struct foo {};` has a different size in GCC vs G++ on x86-64 Linux (due to requirements of the C++ standard). C and C++ are different languages

Reviewer 8: I guess we'll need `repr(Cpp)` then at some point... but that's a different RFC. ;)

Reviewer 6: > How does such a "size 4, align 8" struct behave when it is used in other types, like as fields of another structs or in an array?

It can only be used as the last field (recursively) of its containing type. In that case, the field is 8-byte-aligned.

Reviewer 11: > Rust requires alignment to have a multiple of size, though! MSVC's behavior here is just incredibly cursed ([rust-lang/rust#81996 (comment)](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/81996#issuecomment-4382558266)), and I'm not sure what to do about it, other than asking for an upvote on https://developercommunity.visualstudio.com/t/C-structs-containing-only-a-flexible-arr/11086085

We could start out by warning or even outright rejecting `#[repr(C#editionNext)] struct` where the struct has no non-ZST fields or where the only non-ZST field is a flexible array member. They are already disallowed by iSO C and apparently even have irreconcilable differences between C and C++ for the same target.

That would allow a lot of forward progress to be made at minimal cost.

Reviewer 6: These structs used in e.g. the Linux kernel UAPI. So we would have to find an alternative for those uses, or be comfortable with just not supporting those APIs

Reviewer 11: > These structs used in e.g. the Linux kernel UAPI. So we would have to find an alternative for those uses, or be comfortable with just not supporting those APIs

My understanding is that Linux requires the GNU extension of zero-sized empty structs (e.g. `struct { } foo_;`), but it has `DECLARE_FLEX_ARRAY` to handle FAMs without a field before them. So we could avoid the weird MSVC situation where the alignment is larger than the size, at least.

MSVC doesn't support empty structs at all;  this:
> ```
> struct Empty { };
> ```
results in:
> error C2016: C requires that a struct or union has at least one member

Reviewer 6: No, Linux sometimes uses single-field FAMs directly: https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/61c03dfde8540c7274d9a30dc576bc32951187cd/tools/include/uapi/linux/bpf.h#L7316-L7318

Reviewer 6: > MSVC's behavior here is just incredibly cursed ([rust-lang/rust#81996 (comment)](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/81996#issuecomment-4382558266))

This has apparently been fixed!

Reviewer 2: > > MSVC's behavior here is just incredibly cursed ([rust-lang/rust#81996 (comment)](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/81996#issuecomment-4382558266))
> 
> This has apparently been fixed!

source: [this zulip thread](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/122651-general/topic/Please.20upvote.20my.20issue.20on.20MSVC's.20issue.20tracker/near/615558327)

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## `repr(C#editionCurr)`

Note: This will be identical to `repr(C)` on current editions.

See the current Rust reference entry for `repr(C)`: https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/type-layout.html#the-c-representation

## `repr(C#editionNext)`

Note: This will be a consistent way to refer to the fixed `repr(C)`. It is intended to only be used for the migration between editions. It is possible to use this to have an edition-agnostic way to refer to the fixed `repr(C)`. This second use-case is considered, but will not be prioritized.

> The `C#editionNext` representation is designed for one purpose: creating types that are interoperable with the C Language.
> 
> This representation can be applied to structs, unions, and enums. The exception is [zero-variant enums](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/items/enumerations.html#zero-variant-enums) for which the `C#editionNext` representation is an error.
> 
> - edited version of the [reference](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/type-layout.html#the-c-representation) on `repr(C)`

> The exact algorithm is deferred to whatever the default target `C` compiler does with default settings (or if applicable, the most commonly used settings). `rustc` may grow extra flags to control the behavior of `repr(C)`, in order to match certain flags in the default C compiler, however those will need to be their own proposals. This RFC does not specify any extra control over `repr(C)`.

Reviewer 6: What does `repr(C, packed)` correspond to? Note that there is no equivalent to `packed` in standard C, only compiler extensions.

The following program ([Godbolt](https://godbolt.org/z/7Yodfhh5E)):

```c
#include <stdint.h>
#include <stdio.h>

struct attribute_pack {
    _Alignas(16) uint8_t foo;
} __attribute__((packed));

#pragma pack(push, 1)

struct pragma_pack {
    _Alignas(16) uint8_t foo;
};

#pragma pack(pop)

int main() {
    printf("attribute: %zu %zu\n", sizeof(struct attribute_pack),
           _Alignof(struct attribute_pack));

    printf("pragma: %zu %zu\n", sizeof(struct pragma_pack),
           _Alignof(struct pragma_pack));

    return 0;
}
```

When compiled with x86-64 Linux GCC, prints the following:

```
attribute: 16 16
pragma: 1 1
```

Reviewer 8: I think `_Alignas(16)` has no equivalent in Rust. `#[repr(C, aligned)]` corresponds to `__attribute__((aligned))`.

Then both do the same: https://godbolt.org/z/feeGEEddK

I would specify `repr(C, packed)` as corresponding to `__attribute__((packed))`.

Reviewer 6: > I think `_Alignas(16)` has no equivalent in Rust.

True. My https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3806 would change that, but we can delay this question for that RFC.

> `#[repr(C, aligned)]` corresponds to `__attribute__((aligned))`.

> I would specify `repr(C, packed)` as corresponding to `__attribute__((packed))`.

These do not exist in MSVC; it has `__declspec(align)` and `#pragma pack`.

Author: Having over-aligned items in a packed struct is a different issue entirely, more like #3718. So I would defer to that issue. Since `repr(C#nextEdition)` is intentionally not specified, I think making adjustments to refine the behavior of such over-aligned items can be done in the future.
(I understand that #3718 uses over-aligned types, but I think this is an equivalent idea just expressed with different syntax)

I would be fine with warning in cases where there are overaligned items in a `repr(C#editionNext)` type  to indicate that this behavior is under-specified.

Reviewer 8: > These do not exist in MSVC; it has __declspec(align) and #pragma pack.

And is `__declspec(align)` something one puts on fields or on types?

If any bugs are found (i.e. differences between the target C compiler's layout/ABI and `repr(C)`) then the Rust team reserves the right to change the behavior of `repr(C)` to conform with the target C compiler.

### Flexible Array Members

Given that all major `C` compilers (at the time of writing) put `T field[N];` and `T field[];` at the same offset. `repr(C#editionNext)` will make a guarantee for the last field of a `repr(C#editionNext)` struct.

> * If the only difference between two `repr(C#editionNext)` structs is the type of their last field

Reviewer 11: I think this section would be better written as a patch to https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/type-coercions.html#unsized-coercions using the `Foo` struct.

"two structs" seems to imply some new structural (not nominal) subtyping, which I think is unnecessary. Note how the documentation at https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/type-coercions.html#unsized-coercions is careful to define it in terms of a single generic struct `Foo` instead oof "two structs".

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rfcs/3845/3955f9972618c76701a5b5693ed301eeef69d60b..7a20567d4ebaf1fcd0bdf218e1f362445f0f6a37)*

* If the fields' types are `[T]` or `[T; N]`
* Then the exact offset will also be the same as the equivalent `C` type that has the field type as a flexible array member, i.e. `T field[];`

> * Then the exact offset will also be the same as the equivalent `C` type that has the field type as an array member, i.e. `T field[N];` (of any `N`)

Reviewer 11: If you define these rules as only referring to a struct with a `T: ?Sized` type parameter that is used for the type of the last field, and you keep this:

>  Then the exact offset will also be the same as the equivalent `C` type that has the field type as a flexible array member, i.e. `T field[];`

and remove this:

> Then the exact offset will also be the same as the equivalent `C` type that has the field type as an array member, i.e. `T field[N];` (of any `N`)" 

Then I believe you will have exactly the C rules, without losing anything.

In particular, don't guarantee that this type has the same offset of `data` as `Coercable`:
```
#[repr(C#editionNext)]
struct WithArray {
    len: usize,
    data: [u64; N],
}
```

That is, the `T: ?Sized` used as the type of the last field should trigger the FAM alignment rules for the last field.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rfcs/3845/3955f9972618c76701a5b5693ed301eeef69d60b..7a20567d4ebaf1fcd0bdf218e1f362445f0f6a37)*

Author: > If you define these rules as only referring to a struct with a T: ?Sized type parameter that is used for the type of the last field, and you keep this:

I don't want to make `T: ?Sized` fields special. Currently in Rust, if you manually monomorphize a type (and update all related uses), then you don't change behavior. In the extreme, one could make a tool to eliminate all generics in a binary Rust program, and there would be no change in behavior. I would like to preserve this property.

I would be fine with adding an attribute to trigger FAM alignment rules. But that also seems unnecessary, given that all major C compilers do put flexible array members and array members at the same offset.

Reviewer 6: > I don't want to make `T: ?Sized` fields special. Currently in Rust, if you manually monomorphize a type (and update all related uses), then you don't change behavior.

This isn't quite true, the `repr(Rust)` layout algorithm already does something similar.

* Then the offset of that field only depends on `T` (and cannot depend on the length of the array/slice)

If a generic `repr(C#editionNext)` type has an generic unsized final field (see `Coercable<T>`  below), then the obvious unsizing coercion from `Coercable<[T; N]>` to `Coercable<[T]>` is allowed. i.e. `Coercable<[T; N]>: Unsize<Coercable<[T]>>`.

```rust
#[repr(C#editionNext)]
struct Coercable<T: ?Sized> {
    len: usize,
    data: T,
}
```

This means that the following four types have `data_array` and `data_slice` at the same offset.

```rust
// in Rust
#[repr(C#editionNext)]
struct DataWithArray {
    header: i32,
    len: usize,
    data_array: [T; N],
}

#[repr(C#editionNext)]
struct DataWithSlice {
    header: i32,
    len: usize,
    data_slice: [T],
}
```

```C
// in C
struct DataWithArray {
    int32_t header;
    uintptr_t len;
    T data_array[N];
};

struct DataWithSlice {
    int32_t header;
    uintptr_t len;
    T data_slice[N];
};
```

> If there exists a target where the `C` compiler doesn't put `T field[N];` and `T field[];` at the same offset, then these rules may be revised on those targets. Currently, allow known `C` compiler put array members and flexible array members at the same offset.

Reviewer 11: s/allow/all/

But, again, It is weird to say basically "currently, we guarantee X, but in the future, we might need to revise this guarantee." That's the same as not guaranteeing it.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rfcs/3845/3955f9972618c76701a5b5693ed301eeef69d60b..7a20567d4ebaf1fcd0bdf218e1f362445f0f6a37)*

Author: That's a good point, I think I'll leave this as an unresolved question which will need to be discussed before stabilization. Should this be a target-specific guarnatee or should we raise our platform requirements, and reject and targets which don't lay out flexible array members and array members at the same offset.

It's an edge case which is pretty niche, so I don't want to hold up the RFC acceptance on it.

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Introduce a few new `repr`s (all names can be bikeshedded if this RFC is accepted):
* `repr(ordered_fields)`
* `repr(C#editionCurr)`

> * `repr(C#editionNext)`

Reviewer 12: 😕  do these mean the literal keyword "editionCurr" and "editionNext" or just a placeholder for "2024" / "2027"? 

also a bit awkward as this looks like related to [C#](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_Sharp_(programming_language)).

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rfcs/3845/3955f9972618c76701a5b5693ed301eeef69d60b..db73f7c22b0d0ae7b12928b29222c8c1e42c447f)*

Author: These are just placeholders, I don't want to commit to a specific edition. Personally I think this should be in 2027, but I think forcing the issue won't help get this over the finish line.

Author: I just realized what you meant by looking related to `C#`, good point! Like all names in this RFC, I'm happy to add names to the list and bikeshed them if this RFC gets accepted. So if you have any suggestions, feel free to drop a comment :slightly_smiling_face:

For more details, see this discussion on [irlo](https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/repr-c-aix-struct-alignment/21594/3).

> In AIX, the following struct `Floats` has the following field offsets: `[0, 8, 12]` (in bytes) and a size of 24 bytes (since the first field has a preferred alignment of 8 bytes).

Reviewer 8: I don't follow the part after the "since" here. Why would the preferred alignment affect the size?

Author: Right, this should say natural alignment, and that is correct since the IBM docs say 

> Notes:
>
> 1.  In aggregates, the first member of this data type is aligned according to its natural alignment value; subsequent members of the aggregate are aligned on 4-byte boundaries.

Although after reading this again, I think this also means that

```rust
sturct Ints {
    char a;
    char b; // is this also aligned to a 4-byte boundary?
};
```

And this seems cursed, but maybe I'm missing something

Reviewer 6: > 1. In aggregates, the first member of this data type is aligned according to its natural alignment value; subsequent members of the aggregate are aligned on 4-byte boundaries.

That footnote only applies to entries in the table marked with <sup>1</sup>, i.e. 64-bit and 128-bit floats with the default alignment setting.

Reviewer 6: > Unfortunately IBM doesn't define what they mean by "natural alignment", or do they?

They mean align = size. I’m not sure if they say so explicitly, but based on the table, it’s clearly what they mean.

Author: I've been looking into the various kinds of alignment, and it looks like natural alignment commonly means aligned to the size. So I assume that this is a common term that they aren't bothering to define.

<details>
<summary> sources </summary>

(citing the presidious Wikipedia 😆)

> The CPU in modern computer hardware performs reads and writes to memory most efficiently when the data is naturally aligned, which generally means that the data's memory address is a multiple of the data size

source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_structure_alignment

> We call a datum naturally aligned if its address is aligned to its size. It's called misaligned otherwise.

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/cpp/alignment-cpp-declarations?view=msvc-170#alignment-and-memory-addresses

It is also implied in other sources

>ARM and Thumb processors are designed to efficiently access naturally aligned data, that is, doublewords that lie on addresses that are multiples of eight, words that lie on addresses that are multiples of four, halfwords that lie on addresses that are multiples of two, and single bytes that lie at any byte address. Such data is located on its natural size boundary.

source: https://developer.arm.com/documentation/dui0472/g/compiler-coding-practices/advantages-of-natural-data-alignment

</details>

Author: I've updated the RFC, now it says natural alignment (and provides a definition inline just in case someone doesn't know what that means - like I didn't before!)

I also clarified that the note only applied to `double` and `long double`.
